Doc/bugs.rst, before:

.. _reporting-bugs:

************************
Reporting Bugs in Python
************************

Python is a mature programming language which has established a reputation for
stability.  In order to maintain this reputation, the developers would like to
know of any deficiencies you find in Python.

Bug reports should be submitted via the Python Bug Tracker
(http://bugs.python.org/).  The bug tracker offers a Web form which allows
pertinent information to be entered and submitted to the developers.

The first step in filing a report is to determine whether the problem has
already been reported.  The advantage in doing so, aside from saving the
developers time, is that you learn what has been done to fix it; it may be that
the problem has already been fixed for the next release, or additional
information is needed (in which case you are welcome to provide it if you can!).
To do this, search the bug database using the search box on the top of the page.

In the case of documentation bugs, look at the most recent development docs at
http://docs.python.org/dev to see if the bug has been fixed.

If the problem you're reporting is not already in the bug tracker, go back to
the Python Bug Tracker and log in.  If you don't already have a tracker account,
select the "Register" link or, if you use OpenID, one of the OpenID provider
logos in the sidebar.  It is not possible to submit a bug report anonymously.

Being now logged in, you can submit a bug.  Select the "Create New" link in the
sidebar to open the bug reporting form.

The submission form has a number of fields.  For the "Title" field, enter a
*very* short description of the problem; less than ten words is good.  In the
"Type" field, select the type of your problem; also select the "Component" and
"Versions" to which the bug relates.

In the "Comment" field, describe the problem in detail, including what you
expected to happen and what did happen.  Be sure to include whether any
extension modules were involved, and what hardware and software platform you
were using (including version information as appropriate).

Each bug report will be assigned to a developer who will determine what needs to
be done to correct the problem.  You will receive an update each time action is
taken on the bug.  See http://www.python.org/dev/workflow/ for a detailed
description of the issue workflow.


.. seealso::

   `How to Report Bugs Effectively <http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/bugs.html>`_
      Article which goes into some detail about how to create a useful bug report.
      This describes what kind of information is useful and why it is useful.

   `Bug Writing Guidelines <http://developer.mozilla.org/en/docs/Bug_writing_guidelines>`_
      Information about writing a good bug report.  Some of this is specific to the
      Mozilla project, but describes general good practices.

Commit message:

Add "report a bug" links in some prominent places.  Make it clear that doc bugs can be mailed to docs@python.org.  Clarify tracker usage.

Doc/bugs.rst, after:

.. _reporting-bugs:

**************
Reporting Bugs
**************

Python is a mature programming language which has established a reputation for
stability.  In order to maintain this reputation, the developers would like to
know of any deficiencies you find in Python.


Documentation bugs
==================

If you find a bug in this documentation or would like to propose an improvement,
please send an e-mail to docs@python.org describing the bug and where you found
it.  If you have a suggestion how to fix it, include that as well.

docs@python.org is a mailing list run by volunteers; your request will be
noticed, even if it takes a while to be processed.

Of course, if you want a more persistent record of your issue, you can use the
issue tracker for documentation bugs as well.


Using the Python issue tracker
==============================

Bug reports for Python itself should be submitted via the Python Bug Tracker
(http://bugs.python.org/).  The bug tracker offers a Web form which allows
pertinent information to be entered and submitted to the developers.

The first step in filing a report is to determine whether the problem has
already been reported.  The advantage in doing so, aside from saving the
developers time, is that you learn what has been done to fix it; it may be that
the problem has already been fixed for the next release, or additional
information is needed (in which case you are welcome to provide it if you can!).
To do this, search the bug database using the search box on the top of the page.

If the problem you're reporting is not already in the bug tracker, go back to
the Python Bug Tracker and log in.  If you don't already have a tracker account,
select the "Register" link or, if you use OpenID, one of the OpenID provider
logos in the sidebar.  It is not possible to submit a bug report anonymously.

Being now logged in, you can submit a bug.  Select the "Create New" link in the
sidebar to open the bug reporting form.

The submission form has a number of fields.  For the "Title" field, enter a
*very* short description of the problem; less than ten words is good.  In the
"Type" field, select the type of your problem; also select the "Component" and
"Versions" to which the bug relates.

In the "Comment" field, describe the problem in detail, including what you
expected to happen and what did happen.  Be sure to include whether any
extension modules were involved, and what hardware and software platform you
were using (including version information as appropriate).

Each bug report will be assigned to a developer who will determine what needs to
be done to correct the problem.  You will receive an update each time action is
taken on the bug.  See http://www.python.org/dev/workflow/ for a detailed
description of the issue workflow.


.. seealso::

   `How to Report Bugs Effectively <http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/bugs.html>`_
      Article which goes into some detail about how to create a useful bug report.
      This describes what kind of information is useful and why it is useful.

   `Bug Writing Guidelines <http://developer.mozilla.org/en/docs/Bug_writing_guidelines>`_
      Information about writing a good bug report.  Some of this is specific to the
      Mozilla project, but describes general good practices.
