Doc/c-api/weakref.rst, before:

.. highlightlang:: c

.. _weakrefobjects:

Weak Reference Objects
----------------------

Python supports *weak references* as first-class objects.  There are two
specific object types which directly implement weak references.  The first is a
simple reference object, and the second acts as a proxy for the original object
as much as it can.


.. cfunction:: int PyWeakref_Check(ob)

   Return true if *ob* is either a reference or proxy object.


.. cfunction:: int PyWeakref_CheckRef(ob)

   Return true if *ob* is a reference object.


.. cfunction:: int PyWeakref_CheckProxy(ob)

   Return true if *ob* is a proxy object.


.. cfunction:: PyObject* PyWeakref_NewRef(PyObject *ob, PyObject *callback)

   Return a weak reference object for the object *ob*.  This will always return
   a new reference, but is not guaranteed to create a new object; an existing
   reference object may be returned.  The second parameter, *callback*, can be a
   callable object that receives notification when *ob* is garbage collected; it
   should accept a single parameter, which will be the weak reference object
   itself. *callback* may also be ``None`` or *NULL*.  If *ob* is not a
   weakly-referencable object, or if *callback* is not callable, ``None``, or
   *NULL*, this will return *NULL* and raise :exc:`TypeError`.


.. cfunction:: PyObject* PyWeakref_NewProxy(PyObject *ob, PyObject *callback)

   Return a weak reference proxy object for the object *ob*.  This will always
   return a new reference, but is not guaranteed to create a new object; an
   existing proxy object may be returned.  The second parameter, *callback*, can
   be a callable object that receives notification when *ob* is garbage
   collected; it should accept a single parameter, which will be the weak
   reference object itself. *callback* may also be ``None`` or *NULL*.  If *ob*
   is not a weakly-referencable object, or if *callback* is not callable,
   ``None``, or *NULL*, this will return *NULL* and raise :exc:`TypeError`.


.. cfunction:: PyObject* PyWeakref_GetObject(PyObject *ref)

   Return the referenced object from a weak reference, *ref*.  If the referent is
   no longer live, returns ``None``.


.. cfunction:: PyObject* PyWeakref_GET_OBJECT(PyObject *ref)

   Similar to :cfunc:`PyWeakref_GetObject`, but implemented as a macro that does no
   error checking.

Commit message:

#8578: mention danger of not incref'ing weak referenced object.

Doc/c-api/weakref.rst, after:

.. highlightlang:: c

.. _weakrefobjects:

Weak Reference Objects
----------------------

Python supports *weak references* as first-class objects.  There are two
specific object types which directly implement weak references.  The first is a
simple reference object, and the second acts as a proxy for the original object
as much as it can.


.. cfunction:: int PyWeakref_Check(ob)

   Return true if *ob* is either a reference or proxy object.


.. cfunction:: int PyWeakref_CheckRef(ob)

   Return true if *ob* is a reference object.


.. cfunction:: int PyWeakref_CheckProxy(ob)

   Return true if *ob* is a proxy object.


.. cfunction:: PyObject* PyWeakref_NewRef(PyObject *ob, PyObject *callback)

   Return a weak reference object for the object *ob*.  This will always return
   a new reference, but is not guaranteed to create a new object; an existing
   reference object may be returned.  The second parameter, *callback*, can be a
   callable object that receives notification when *ob* is garbage collected; it
   should accept a single parameter, which will be the weak reference object
   itself. *callback* may also be ``None`` or *NULL*.  If *ob* is not a
   weakly-referencable object, or if *callback* is not callable, ``None``, or
   *NULL*, this will return *NULL* and raise :exc:`TypeError`.


.. cfunction:: PyObject* PyWeakref_NewProxy(PyObject *ob, PyObject *callback)

   Return a weak reference proxy object for the object *ob*.  This will always
   return a new reference, but is not guaranteed to create a new object; an
   existing proxy object may be returned.  The second parameter, *callback*, can
   be a callable object that receives notification when *ob* is garbage
   collected; it should accept a single parameter, which will be the weak
   reference object itself. *callback* may also be ``None`` or *NULL*.  If *ob*
   is not a weakly-referencable object, or if *callback* is not callable,
   ``None``, or *NULL*, this will return *NULL* and raise :exc:`TypeError`.


.. cfunction:: PyObject* PyWeakref_GetObject(PyObject *ref)

   Return the referenced object from a weak reference, *ref*.  If the referent is
   no longer live, returns :const:`Py_None`.

   .. warning::

      This function returns a **borrowed reference** to the referenced object.
      This means that you should always call :cfunc:`Py_INCREF` on the object
      except if you know that it cannot be destroyed while you are still
      using it.


.. cfunction:: PyObject* PyWeakref_GET_OBJECT(PyObject *ref)

   Similar to :cfunc:`PyWeakref_GetObject`, but implemented as a macro that does no
   error checking.
